initial collection requirements (#70)
openEOPlatform/documentation: federation/backends/collections.md

# Collections
This page describes requirements on STAC collection metadata for backend providers in the openEO platform federation. These requirements should be considered an addition to what is already required by the [openEO API](https://api.openeo.org/#tag/EO-Data-Discovery/operation/describe-collection).

## Collection availability

The collections are a key asset of the platform, and users need to know what they can expect from a certain collection.
The federation relies on openEO collection metadata following the STAC specification to communicate this towards the user. Backend providers
need to comply with these requirements for their collection:

The 'experimental' flag from https://stac-extensions.github.io/version/v1.1.0/schema.json needs to be set on experimental collections. 

> A collection can be experimental either because there are issues with the actual data or catalog, or because of backend specific issues that make the use of the collection unstable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A collection can be experimental either because there are issues with the actual data or catalog, or because of backend specific issues that make the use of the collection unstable (e.g., the collection was produced within a project and it's not clear how long it will be accessible through the backend). 
```

Reviewer: I somehow understood backend specific issues differently (but after the explanation above it's now clear). As you agreed to add some "min. validity" time for the non experimental collections, I think we can omit this here.

> A collection can be experimental either because there are issues with the actual data or catalog, or because of backend specific issues that make the use of the collection unstable. 

Reviewer: @jdries I am a bit surprised we need to mention it, but please add to the guidelines, that collection names should be stable and not change.

> A collection can be experimental either because there are issues with the actual data or catalog, or because of backend specific issues that make the use of the collection unstable. 

Author: I added a proposal for concrete requirements.

> A collection can be experimental either because there are issues with the actual data or catalog, or because of backend specific issues that make the use of the collection unstable. 

Reviewer: Current suggestions are fine from my side so for me we can resolve the issue.

A collection marked as experimental does not need to comply with further requirements. 

Collections need to indicate the key 'providers' that are responsible for ensuring access to the data and continuity in the case of active missions. The user may depend on the guarantees offered by these
providers with respect to the properties (timeliness, completeness,...) of a specific collection. 

> The providers with role 'host' and 'producer' are mandatory.

Reviewer: @jdries Can you explain a bit more why we need to add host? We currently only have 'processor' in our collections (which is in our case is the same as the 'host'). We currently also don't list producer so if we merge this, we will need a couple of days to update our collections.

Author: According to STAC, the host is where the underlying data is stored. When a user wants to determine how reliable a collection is, the reputation of the host is crucial. In most cases, it is impossible for a single openEO backend to offer more reliability than the host of the data.

Author: PS: I don't think it's a problem if we need a few days to update.

Reviewer: I see. I thought of the host as the entity owning the S3 bucket/paying for the storage. In that case host for our data would be in most cases AWS so your statement about the reliability is very much true. I don't see a problem with adding this.

The collection description needs to specify known limitations with respect to the original collection. For instance, if only a subset of the full archive is available, this should be indicated.

> Collections without an end time are assumed to be active missions. By default, 99% of items in these collections should be available within 48 hours after being published by the producer. This gives users a basic guarantee with respect to timeliness of products. 

Reviewer: For simplicity reasons I'd try to keep this general. Am currently checking what's the min thing we can safely commit to.

> Collections without an end time are assumed to be active missions. By default, 99% of items in these collections should be available within 48 hours after being published by the producer. This gives users a basic guarantee with respect to timeliness of products. 

Reviewer: For us most items are on average 1h after publishing in our backend so the statement is something we can commit to.

> 

Reviewer: Do we want to include here the min. notice time a backend has to give to the user in case a non experimental collection will be removed or is this to much detail and we keep it for the OLAs (might be different per backend but a minimum agreement 6 months? can maybe be included here).

Author: yes, that's a good idea, will add in next update.

Author: done

3. Collections without an end time are assumed to be active missions. By default, 99% of items in these collections should be available within 48 hours after being published by the producer. This gives users a basic guarantee with respect to timeliness of products. 
4. Collection metadata should be valid STAC metadata and must include all extensions in `stac_extensions`. Tools such as [STAC-validator](https://github.com/stac-utils/stac-validator) can indicate obvious issues.
5. FAIR principle R1: [(Meta)data are richly described with a plurality of accurate and relevant attributes](https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/r1-metadata-richly-described-plurality-accurate-relevant-attributes/)
6. Collections have to follow harmonization guidelines specified below, if applicable.
7. Collections naming (id, bands) should remain constant. 
8. Backwards incompatible changes or removal need to be announced with a lead time of 6 months, together with a migration path.
9. The backend hosting the collection should not be experimental, and have an availability of 98% on a monthly basis for all features.

> 10. Evidence of maturity and usage needs to be available. Significant testing by users or the backend itself is required.

Author: I updated points 9 and 10 to be less vague.

> 10. Evidence of maturity and usage needs to be available. Significant testing by users or the backend itself is required.

Reviewer: Thanks, resolving

A collection can be experimental either because there are issues with the actual data or catalog, or because of backend specific issues that make the use of the collection unstable. 
A collection marked as experimental does not need to comply with further requirements. 

### Requirements for non-experimental collections

The main goal for non-experimental features is to achieve high user satisfaction by providing stability & usability _and_ to comply with federation agreements that make it possible to offer a unified service.
The list below makes this more concrete, but is not expected to cover all aspects. It is therefore important that providers, who know their implementations and datasets best, properly judge if a specific collection can be
considered non-experimental.

1. Collections need to indicate the key 'providers' that are responsible for ensuring access to the data and continuity in the case of active missions. The user may depend on the guarantees offered by these
providers with respect to the properties (timeliness, completeness,...) of a specific collection. 
The providers with role 'host' and 'producer' are mandatory.

> 2. The collection description needs to specify known limitations with respect to the original collection. For instance, if only a subset of the full archive is available, this should be indicated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The collection description and extents need to specify known limitations with respect to the original collection. For instance, if only a subset of the full archive is available, this should be indicated.
```

Author: @m-mohr  are you suggesting that spatial extents need to be a very complex geometry indicating exactly where data may be found at some point in time? Because that's a difficult thing, and would blow up collection metadata.

Reviewer 2: No, more high-level. If you have Australia and Europe covered, specify two bounding boxes, not "the whole world" (or the union of both). I just mean reasonable extents when you have clusters of data, let's say up to 10 or whatever number that seems reasonable.

Author: updated

3. Collections without an end time are assumed to be active missions. By default, 99% of items in these collections should be available within 48 hours after being published by the producer. This gives users a basic guarantee with respect to timeliness of products. 

> 4. Collection metadata should be valid STAC metadata. This can be verified by tools such as [STAC-validator](https://github.com/stac-utils/stac-validator)

Reviewer 2: If a STAC validator validates a collection it doesn't necessarily mean it's actually valid. JSON Schema can't check everything and it depends on the stac_extensions fields. If they are not present no extensions can be checked. 

```suggestion
4. Collection metadata should be valid STAC metadata and must include all extensions in `stac_extensions`. Tools such as [STAC-validator](https://github.com/stac-utils/stac-validator) can indicate obvious issues.
```

5. Collections have to follow harmonization guidelines specified below, if applicable.

> 6. Collections naming (id, bands) should remain constant. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Collections naming (id, dimensions, bands) should remain constant. 
```

7. Backwards incompatible changes or removal need to be announced with a lead time of 6 months, together with a migration path.

> 8. The backend hosting the collection should not be experimental, and have an availability of 98% on a monthly basis for all features.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this a collection independant requirement? This feels out of place here.

Reviewer: Agree

Author: it is indeed collection independent: if the backend is unstable, all collections hosted on it are unstable.
I understand why it feels out of place, but again, if you leave it out, an unstable backend can join the federation and publish collections that are marked as 'stable', while using them would not work at all if for instance there's constant downtime. This is actually also a fairly simple requirement to achieve.

The alternative would be that you somehow have a different way of informing the user that using such a collection is risky because the backend may be offline a lot, but at the end of the day, that would be more complex, and comes down to the same thing.

Author: One suggestion:
8. Minimum availability of non-experimental collections is 98% on a monthly basis. The backend availability is used here if availability is not measured per collection.

Reviewer: I like the new wording and think it's indeed like you said fairly simple to achieve and at the same time gives some security to the user that a stable collection is majority of the time (>98%) usable.

> 9. Evidence of maturity and usage needs to be available. Significant testing by users or the backend itself is required.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? How can a new collection have usage? Can't collection start experimental? Should that be the case for every new collection for e.g. 2 months?

Reviewer: I also find this a bit vague, hard to verify and maybe a bit too much.

I am not sure if we want to flat new stable collections as experimental as this might prevent users from "trusting" them to be stable. 

Also why does a collecting need usage to be stable. If for whatever reason users are not interested in it, it can still be non-experimental. That there should be significant testing at some point makes sense.

Suggestion would be to remove this for now.

Author: Ideally, you trust the backend provider to know when to set the flag, but we already see that there's huge variation in the use of the term 'stable'.
I didn't write that all new collections are unstable by default, because we often have collections that have exactly the same properties as existing mature collections (like COG's in catalog Y on storage system X), and then we are quite sure that this collection is stable after doing some minimal testing. 

I'm fine with suggestions, but just removing it seems to leave a lot of room for publishing something unstable that does comply with all the other points.

Author: replaced with more accurate statement
